docs: add configure databases via terraform blog (#748)
bytebase/bytebase.com: content/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform.md

---

> title: Configure Databases via Terraform

Reviewer: Manage Databases in Bytebase with Terraform

1. Install the HashiCorp tap, a repository of all our Homebrew packages.
```bash
brew tap hashicorp/tap
```

2. Install Terraform with hashicorp/tap/terraform.

```bash
brew install hashicorp/tap/terraform
```

3. Verify the installation by typing.

```bash
terraform -help
```

## Run Bytebase

In this section, you’ll start Bytebase and follow its onboarding guide.

1. Make sure your docker daemon is running, and then start the Bytebase docker container by typing the following command in the terminal.

```bash
docker run --init \
  --name bytebase \
  --restart always \
  --publish 5678:8080 \
  --health-cmd "curl --fail http://localhost:5678/healthz || exit 1" \
  --health-interval 5m \
  --health-timeout 60s \
  --volume ~/.bytebase/data:/var/opt/bytebase \
  bytebase/bytebase:1.11.0 \
  --data /var/opt/bytebase \
  --port 8080
```

2. Type the following commands one by one in the terminal to start two MySQL instances, and they will be mapped to Test and Prod environments later.

```bash
docker run --name mysqldtest \
  --publish 3306:3306 \
  -e MYSQL_ROOT_HOST=172.17.0.1 \
  -e MYSQL_ROOT_PASSWORD=testpwd1 \
  mysql/mysql-server:8.0
```

```bash

> docker run --name mysqldprod \

Reviewer: this should be 3307 and have a different host?

1. Follow the onboard guidance or click **Add instance** on home page.
![add-instance](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/add-instance.webp)

2. Create an instance for `Test` Environment with the following configuration. Fill **username**/**password** as `root`/`testpwd1`
![create-instance](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/create-instance.webp)

3. Follow the onboard guidance or click **New Project** on Projects page. Create a project `Test` with key `TEST` and click Next.
![create-project](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/create-project.webp)

4. Follow the onboard guidance or Click **New DB** on the project `Test` page.
![add-new-db](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/add-new-db.webp)

5. Create a database `demo`, and click Next. This will take you to the issue page, an issue is created. Since it’s for `Test` environment, it will execute without approval from you. Click **Resolve issue**, and the issue will be done.

![create-db-demo](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/create-db-demo.webp)

![issue-db-demo](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/issue-db-demo.webp)

> ## Add instances via Terraform

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Add Instances via Terraform
```

> You’ve added an instance for the `Test` environment in Bytebase by clicking What if you need to add hundreds of instances. In this section, you’ll witness the process simplification terraform brings.

Reviewer: incomplete sentence

2. Turn on **Create as service account**, fill email with prefix `tf`, and click **+ Add**.

![bb-add-tf](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/bb-add-tf.webp)

3. Scroll down, and you can see the newly added account there. Click **Copy Service Key**.

![bb-copy-tf-key](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/bb-copy-tf-key.webp)

![bb-key-copied](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/bb-key-copied.webp)

### Step 3 - Query to List all resources

1. Paste the **Service Key**, **Service Account Email**, and URL into `main.tf`.The file now should look like this:

![vscode-tf-configure](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/vscode-tf-configure.webp)

2. Paste the following queries after the **provider** block and save the file. What it does is to list all existing environments and instances and print those out in the terminal.

```other
# List all environment
data "bytebase_environment_list" "all" {}
output "all_environments" {
 value = data.bytebase_environment_list.all
}
# List all instances
data "bytebase_instance_list" "all" {}
output "all_instances" {
 value = data.bytebase_instance_list.all
}
```

> 3. Run `terraform init` + **Enter**, `terraform plan` + **Enter** and `terraform apply` + **Enter** one by one in the terminal. You’ll see the output:

Reviewer: don't need to say + Enter, since that should be inferred by saying "Run"

}

# Create another environment named "Prod"
resource "bytebase_environment" "prod" {
    resource_id = local.environment_id_prod
    title = "Prod"
    order = 1
    environment_tier_policy = "UNPROTECTED"
}

# Create a new instance named "MySQL Test TF"  
resource "bytebase_instance" "test" {
    resource_id = local.instance_id_test
    environment = bytebase_environment.test.resource_id
    title = "MySQL Test TF"
    engine = "MYSQL"

    # You need to specific the data source
    data_sources {
        title = "admin data source"
        type = "ADMIN"
        username = "root"
        password = "testpwd1"
        host = "host.docker.internal"
        port = "3307"
    }
}

# Create a new instance named "MySQL Prod TF"
resource "bytebase_instance" "prod" {
    resource_id = local.instance_id_prod
    environment = bytebase_environment.prod.resource_id
    title = "MySQL Prod TF"
    engine = "MYSQL"

    # You need to specific the data source
    data_sources {
        title = "admin data source"
        type = "ADMIN"
        username = "root"
        password = "testpwd1"
        host = "host.docker.internal"
        port = "3308"
    }
}
````

> What it does is first define some variables, and then add four resources: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What it does is to first define some variables, and then add four resources: 
```

- two environments – `Test` and `Prod`
- two instances - `MySQL Test TF` and `MySQL Prod TF`

> 2. Run `terraform init` + **Enter**, `terraform plan` + **Enter** and `terraform apply` + **Enter** one by one in the terminal. You will see this in the terminal.

Reviewer: Same here, no need to say Enter

![terminal-ft-apply](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/terminal-ft-apply.webp)

3. Go back to Bytebase, and click **Environments**. There is nothing changed with these two environments.
![environments-test-prod](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/environments-test-prod.webp)

If you go back to the previous query output
```other
"resource_id" = "test"
"title" = "Test"
```

```other
"resource_id" = "prod"
"title" = "Prod"
```

You can see that the `resource_id` happens to be the same as in the local variables:
```other
environment_id_test = "test"
environment_id_prod = "prod"
```

Combined with the terminal warning message above: 
```other
Warning: Environment already exists
... 
Environment test already exists, try to exec the update operation
```

> What happened is that the two existing environments match with the ones terraform declare by resource_id, so instead of adding, they do update instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What happened is that the two existing environments match with the ones terraform declare by resource_id, so the Bytebase provider will attempt to update the environment.
```

### Step 5 - Test if the instances added by terraform are working

1. Click **Projects** on the top navigation bar, and then click New Project. Create a new project called `TestTF`.
![create-proj-tf](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/create-proj-tf.webp)

2. Click TestTF on the left side bar, and click **New DB**.

![testtf-new-db](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/testtf-new-db.webp)

3. Fill out the form as follows and click **Create**.
- **Name**: demotf
- **Environment**: Test
- **Instance**: MySQL Test TF

![demotf-create-db](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/demotf-create-db.webp)

4. You’ll be redirected to the issue page, and click **Resolve issue**.
![issue-demotf-done](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/issue-demotf-done.webp)

5. Click Instances on the top navigation bar, then select `MySQL Test TF`. You’ll see there are two databases in it. It’s because `MySQL Test` and `MySQL Test TF` connect to the same database instance.

![test-tf-db](/static/blog/configure-databases-via-terraform/test-tf-db.webp)

6. Repeat the process with `MySQL Prod TF` to make sure that works too.

## Summary and Next

> Now you have learned how to use Terraform to provision your MySQL database environments and instances in Bytebase, for PostgreSQL user you can even declare user manage database roles. You can check more [example usage in GitHub](https://github.com/bytebase/terraform-provider-bytebase/tree/main/examples).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now you have learned how to use Terraform to manage your MySQL database environments and instances in Bytebase, for PostgreSQL, you can futher declare database roles. Please check more [example usage in GitHub](https://github.com/bytebase/terraform-provider-bytebase/tree/main/examples).
```
